# Project Introduction
A Startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In order to enable Sparkify to parse their data automated over S3 into Redshift, they have used Airflow to schedule and monitor their pipeline jobs.

# Files in the repository
airflow: workspace folder storing the airflow DAGs and plugins used by the airflow server.
airflow/dags/udac_sparkify_dag.py: "Main"-DAG written in Python containing all steps of the pipeline.
airflow/dags/sparkify_subdag.py: The subdag used to load the dimensions tables 
airflow/plugins/operators/: Folder containing such called operators which can be called inside an Airflow DAG. These are python classes to outsource and build generic functions as modules of the DAG.



## The database schema design and ETL pipeline.
In order to enable Sparkify to analyze their data, a Relational Database Schema was created, which can be filled with an ETL pipeline.

The so-called star scheme enables the company to view the user behaviour over several dimensions. The fact table is used to store all user song activities that contain the category "NextSong". Using this table, the company can relate and analyze the dimensions users, songs, artists and time.

## Fact Table: songplays
Dimension Tables: users, songs, artists and time.
Dataset used
The data is queried from s3 buckets hosted at AWS

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

# Operators
Operators create necessary tables, stage the data, transform the data, and run checks on data quality.

Connections and Hooks are configured using Airflow's built-in functionalities.

All of the operators and task run SQL statements against the Redshift database.

## Stage Operator
The stage operator loads any JSON and CSV formatted files from S3 to Amazon Redshift. The operator creates and runs a SQL COPY statement based on the parameters provided. The operator's parameters should specify where in S3 the file is loaded and what is the target table.

Task to stage CSV and JSON data is included in the DAG and uses the RedshiftStage operator: There is a task that to stages data from S3 to Redshift. (Runs a Redshift copy statement)

Task uses params: Instead of running a static SQL statement to stage the data, the task uses params to generate the copy statement dynamically. It also contains a templated field that allows it to load timestamped files from S3 based on the execution time and run backfills.

Logging used: The operator contains logging in different steps of the execution

The database connection is created by using a hook and a connection: The SQL statements are executed by using a Airflow hook

## Fact and Dimension Operators
The dimension and fact operators make use of the SQL helper class to run data transformations. Operators take as input the SQL statement from the helper class and target the database on which to run the query against. A target table is also defined that contains the results of the transformation.

Dimension loads are done with the truncate-insert pattern where the target table is emptied before the load. There is a parameter that allows switching between insert modes when loading dimensions. Fact tables are massive so they only allow append type functionality.

Set of tasks using the dimension load operator is in the DAG: Dimensions are loaded with on the LoadDimension operator

A task using the fact load operator is in the DAG: Facts are loaded with on the LoadFact operator

Both operators use params: Instead of running a static SQL statement to stage the data, the task uses params to generate the copy statement dynamically

The dimension task contains a param to allow switch between append and insert-delete functionality: The DAG allows to switch between append-only and delete-load functionality

## Data Quality Operator
The data quality operator is used to run checks on the data itself. The operator's main functionality is to receive one or more SQL based test cases along with the expected results and execute the tests. For each the test, the test result and expected result are checked and if there is no match, the operator raises an exception and the task is retried and fails eventually.

For example one test could be a SQL statement that checks if certain column contains NULL values by counting all the rows that have NULL in the column. We do not want to have any NULLs so expected result would be 0 and the test would compare the SQL statement's outcome to the expected result.

A task using the data quality operator is in the DAG and at least one data quality check is done: Data quality check is done with correct operator

The operator raises an error if the check fails: The DAG either fails or retries n times

The operator is parametrized: Operator uses params to get the tests and the results, tests are not hard coded to the operator

# Airflow UI views of DAG and plugins
The dag follows the data flow provided in the instructions, all the tasks have a dependency and DAG begins with a start_execution task and ends with a end_execution task.